---
layout: post
title: "Working By Budget Instead Of Hour"
date: August 1st, 2014
tags: ['web', 'design', 'rates', 'budget', 'for hire', 'availability']
---

## The more I quote projects by the hour, the more convinced I am that I’m doing it wrong.

Having an hourly rate is definitely a good idea. Even if it’s just to give yourself an underlying gauge of what you’re earning for your time. If anything like me though, it’s probably not the best approach to use when bidding for new projects. It can be the cause of lost leads that had you had the chance to compromise a little on, you could have been working on right now.

Consider the following case as an example. Joe sends you an email with some details about a potential project for you. You estimate it would take you two months in total to complete, giving yourself plenty of time. Given your example hourly rate, you quote him £10,000. Everything seemed to be perfect and you were a great fit for the project but you never hear back from Joe. Did he miss your reply? Did it end up in his junk folder? Did he decide against going ahead with his project? None of the previous. He went with someone else as you quoted beyond his unknown-to-you budget of £8,000.

It may be the case that you wouldn’t have been able to take on the work within his budget but I would have. As would a lot of other lesser-known designers and developers. You never got the chance to negotiate though and perhaps even if you did, your initial estimate would still be off-putting and in the back of Joe’s mind.

Avoiding this situation can be achieved by simply requiring a budget up front. This doesn’t need to be a precise figure. Even just having an idea of what the client would like to spend will help you. Remember, that’s what you’re likely to get a lot of the time — not the amount the client has at their disposal to get the project completed but the amount that they imagine it will cost and the amount that you’re likely to work with.

Back to the example, let’s see how it could have gone. Joe sends the same email. You estimate the same timeframe but instead of sending back your quote, you have a conversation with Joe about his budget. He’s a small business owner and cannot afford a penny more than his £8,000 budget. Although you would charge £10,000 for this amount of work, you really like the project and your calendar is open anyway — you’re likely to spend those two months looking for more work and eating away at savings to support yourself while doing so. Or, you could accept the project for £8,000 and help both yourself and Joe.

Your rate should be a guide, not a law.
